In the preparation of a book of this nature, to be used in the grade
schools, we realize that the one fundamental thing to keep in mind is
the economic importance of the insect, be it good or bad. The child
wants to know what is good and what is bad and how he can make use of
the good and how he can get rid of the bad. And yet there is something
more associated with the life, work and development of each tiny insect.
There is a story--a story of growth, not unlike that of the developing
child, a story of courage, strife and ultimate success or failure, which
is as interesting and of greater value to the child than many of the
stories of adventure and of historical facts. Snatches of these stories
will appear in the following chapters along with the studies on insects
and their economic importance.

In the development of our grade school system, especially in the rural
districts, there is a growing demand for some practical work along with
the regular cultural studies. To the child in the rural schools,
practical knowledge naturally tends toward agriculture. Many of these
boys and girls do not have a chance to pursue studies beyond the grades
and it therefore becomes necessary to introduce some elementary
agriculture into the grades to supply the natural craving of this vast
assemblage of children in the rural schools of our land.

In the search for a study which will give unlimited scope for
independent thought and observation and which will lead the child to
understand better the forces of nature that affect agriculture, nothing
is so readily available and attractive to the child as nature study, an
elementary study of the natural sciences. In fact agriculture is
primarily a course in nature study where we study how plants and animals
struggle for existence.

There is a period in the life of every child when he is especially
susceptible to the "call of the fields;" when he roams through woods or
by shady brooks gathering flowers, fishing for mud-cats and cleaning out
bumble-bees' nests. It is often compared with the life of the savage and
is merely the outward expression of an inward craving for a closer
relation with nature and her creatures. If one can reach a child while
at that age he has a ready listener and an apt pupil. That is the time
to guide and instruct the child along the line of nature study.

The most important questions confronting the average teacher in the
grade schools are: "What material shall I use and how shall I proceed to
direct the child along this line?" First of all use that material which
is most readily available, which is most familiar to the child and
which will attract and hold his attention. There is nothing so readily
available and so generally interesting to both boys and girls as are the
thousands of fluttering, buzzing, hopping and creeping forms of insects.
They are present everywhere, in all seasons and are known to every child
of the city or farm. They are easily observed in the field and can be
kept in confinement for study. Many of them are of the greatest
importance to man; a study of them becomes of special value.

In pursuing a study of nature and her creatures one should go into the
woods and fields as much as possible and study them where they are
found. In this way one can determine how they live together, what they
feed on and the various other questions which the inquisitive mind of a
healthy child will ask. When field work is not possible, gather the
insects and keep them alive in jars where they can be fed and observed.
Some forms cannot be kept in confinement and in such cases samples
should be killed and pinned, thereby forming a collection for study.

Most of the forms which are included in the following chapters can be
kept in confinement in glass jars or studies out doors. The studies have
been made so general that in case the particular form mentioned is not
available any closely related form can be used. Each child should make a
small collection of living and pinned insects for study and should be
encouraged to observe insects and their work in the field. The
collections and many of the observations could be made to good advantage
during the summer vacation when the insects are most abundant and
active.

Pupils should not be encouraged merely to make observations, but they
should be required to record them as well. Brief descriptions of the
appearance and development of insects, the injury they do, and remedies
for the same, will help fix in mind facts which otherwise might soon be
forgotten. Drawings, whenever possible, should also be required. The
pupil who can record observations accurately with drawings will not soon
forget them. The teacher should therefore require each pupil to provide
himself with a note-book for keeping brief, but accurate notes and
careful drawings. The drawings should be made with a hard lead pencil on
un-ruled paper, the size of the note-book, and the pupils should be
encouraged to be neat and accurate.

The author wishes to take this opportunity of expressing his deep
appreciation for the many helpful suggestions and other assistance which
Mr. R. H. Emberson, superintendent of Boys and Girls Club Work in
Missouri, has given. It was his life-long devotion to the boys and girls
of the grade schools and his keen appreciation of their needs that lead
him first to suggest to the author the importance of preparing this
little book for their use.

                                        LEONARD HASEMAN
 University of Missouri.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_The study of entomology is one of the most fascinating of
    pursuits. It takes its votaries into the treasure-houses of Nature,
    and explains some of the wonderful series of links which form the
    great chain of creation. It lays open before us another world, of
    which we have been hitherto unconscious, and shows us that the
    tiniest insect, so small perhaps that the unaided eye can scarcely
    see it, has its work to do in the world, and does it._"

                                        --REV. J. G. WOOD.




CHAPTER I

INSECTS

    "_There is a difference between a grub and a butterfly; yet your
    butterfly was a grub._"

                                        --SHAKESPEARE.


In undertaking a study of insects it is well first of all to know
something about what they are, their general nature, appearance, habits
and development. The insects comprise the largest group of animals on
the globe. There are about four times as many different kinds of insects
as all other kinds of animals combined. Insects vary greatly in size.
Some are as large as small birds, while others are so small that a
thousand placed in one pile would not equal the size of a pea.

Insects are commonly spoken of as "bugs." This term, however, is
properly used only when referring to the one order of insects which
includes the sap and blood-sucking insects such as the chinch bug,
bed-bug, squash bug, and the like. Then too, there are many so-called
"bugs" which are not insects at all. Spiders, thousand-legs, crawfishes
and even earth-worms are often spoken of as bugs.


_What They Are_

[Illustration: Side view of grasshopper with wings and legs partly
removed. Note the division of the body into head, thorax, composed of
prothorax, mesothorax and metathorax, and abdomen consisting of
ring-like segments.]

Insects are variously formed, but as a rule the mature ones have three
and only three pairs of legs, one pair of feelers, one pair of large
eyes, and one or two pairs of wings. The body is divided into a head,
thorax and abdomen. The head bears the eyes, feelers and mouth, the
thorax bears the legs and wings, and the abdomen is made up of a number
of segments. The presence of wings at once decides whether or not it is
an insect, for, aside from bats and birds, insects alone have true
wings. These are the distinguishing characters of the full grown insect,
but, like birds, they hatch from eggs and while young do not always look
like their parents. When young they may take on various shapes as
caterpillars, borers, maggots, grubs, hoppers, and the like. Young
insects are often difficult to distinguish from true worms, centipedes,
snails, and such forms, but after one has collected and reared some of
the young and watched them pass through the different stages and emerge
with wings they are much more easily recognized.


_Their Principal Characteristics_

[Illustration: Face of grasshopper enlarged showing parts; ant.,
antenna; eye, compound eye; oc., ocellus or simple eye; cl., clypeus;
lbr., labrum or upper lip; mx. p., maxillary palpus; lb. p., labial
palpus; lab., labium or lower lip.]

Young insects as a rule are soft like caterpillars and maggots, while
the old ones usually have a hard body wall, similar to the beetles and
wasps. The wings are usually thin and transparent though in some cases
they are leathery or hard as in case of beetles or covered with scales
as in the butterflies. The three pairs of legs are jointed and used for
running, climbing, jumping, swimming, digging or grasping. The feelers
or antennae are usually threadlike, clubbed, or resemble a feather and
extend forward or sidewise from the head. The large eyes are compound,
being made up of many great small units which, when magnified, resemble
honey-comb. In some cases two or three small bead-like eyes may be
present besides the two large eyes. The mouth parts of insects may be
formed for chewing, as in the grasshopper, or for sucking up liquids, as
in the mosquito. The mouth of an insect is built on an entirely
different plan from our own. Chewing insects have an upper and lower lip
and between these there are two pairs of grinding jaws. These jaws are
hinged at the side of the face and when chewing they come together from
either side so as to meet in the middle of the mouth. They therefore
work sidewise rather than up and down. The mouth parts of the sucking
insects are drawn out to form a sucking tube or proboscis as in case of
the butterfly or mosquito.

[Illustration: Mouth parts of grasshopper shown in relative position;
lbr., labrum; md., mandibles; hyp., hypopharynx; max., maxillae; lab.,
labium.]

[Illustration: Leg of grasshopper showing segmentation. The basal
segment c, is the coxa, the next t, the trochanter, the large segment f,
the femur, the long slender one ti, the tibia, and the three jointed
tarsus ta, with claws at the tip.]

The internal organs of insects are similar to those of other animals.
The digestive tube consists of oesophagus, gizzard, or stomach, and
intestines. The nervous system is well developed as shown by the extreme
sensitiveness of insects to touch. The brain is comparatively small
except in the bees and ants. The circulatory system consists simply of a
long tube heart, the blood vessels being absent. In this way the
internal organs of the insect are simply bathed in the blood. The
system of respiration is most complicated. The air is taken in through
pores usually along the side of the body and is then carried through
fine tracheal tubes to all parts of the body. You cannot drown an insect
by putting its head under water, since it does not breathe through its
mouth. The muscular system is similar to that of other animals which
have the skeleton on the outside.

[Illustration: The internal organs of the honey bee. Note the strong
wing muscles in the thorax. The tube-like heart begins in the head and
extends back through the thorax and follows the curve of the abdomen.
Below the heart is the digestive tube consisting of the slender
oesophagus which extends back to the expanded honey stomach, in which
the bee carries the nectar it collects from flowers, then the curled
true stomach, the small intestine and expanded large intestine. Below
this is the nervous system consisting of the brain and a chain of
connected enlargements or ganglia extending back into the abdomen in the
lower part of the body. The respiratory system in part appears just
above the honey stomach, and the black circular or oval spots are cross
sections of connecting air tubes, which run all through the body. Also
note the sting with the poison gland and sack which are pulled out with
the sting; also the sucking tube for getting honey from flowers, and the
structures on the legs for gathering and carrying pollen; the pollen
basket is on the back side of the hind leg.]


_Their Methods of Developing_

In most cases the parent insect deposits small eggs which hatch later
into the young insects. In some cases, as with the blow-flies, the
maggot may hatch from the egg while yet in the parent's body, when the
active larva is born alive. Whether the egg hatches before or after it
is deposited, the young insect continues to develop in one of three
ways. It may resemble the parent and simply grow as does a kitten, or it
may look somewhat like its parent though smaller and without wings, as
the young grasshopper, or it may bear no resemblance whatever to the
parent, as the caterpillar which feeds and grows and finally spins a
cocoon in which it passes to the resting chrysalis stage and later
emerges with wings. The development of insects is therefore extremely
complicated.

[Illustration: The chinch bug showing development with incomplete
metamorphosis; a, egg; b, first nymph; c, second nymph; d, third nymph;
e, fourth nymph; f, adult winged bug; g, chinch bugs extracting sap from
corn plant. To control this pest burn over all winter harboring places
and use chemical or dust barriers following wheat harvest.]


_The Principal Orders_

In order to study a group of animals which includes so many thousand
different kinds it is necessary to divide them into a number of sharply
defined divisions or orders. All animal life is naturally grouped into
such divisions and subdivisions. Among the insects we at once detect
seven large, sharply defined divisions or orders, and ten or more
smaller ones. Of these we have first, the two-winged true flies; second,
the four-winged butterflies and moths; third, the hard-backed beetles;
fourth, the stinging four-winged wasps and bees; fifth, the variously
formed sucking insects or true bugs, as chinch bugs and bed-bugs; sixth,
the rapid-flying four-winged snake doctors or dragon-flies and, seventh,
the hopping forms, the grasshoppers. Besides these we have the various
smaller orders of water-loving insects, fleas, etc. The seven groups
mentioned above include the majority of our common forms and in the
studies to follow we will include only representatives from these
orders.

[Illustration: The Hessian fly showing development with complete
metamorphosis; a, egg; b, larva or maggot; c, flax-seed stage; d, pupa;
e, adult winged fly; f, wheat stubble with flax-seed stages near base
taken after harvest. To control this pest, plow under stubble after
harvest; keep down all volunteer wheat and sow wheat after fly-free date
in the fall.]


_Their Habits_

The habits of insects are as varied as their forms and adaptations. Some
live in the water all their life, others spend a part of their life
under water, others live the care-free life of the open air, others
enjoy feeding upon and living in the foulest of filth, others associate
themselves with certain definite crops or animals thereby doing untold
injury, while others produce food and other materials which are to be
used by man for his comfort. Every imaginable nook and crook, from the
depths of lakes to the tops of mountains, from the warm, sunny south to
the cold frigid north, from the foul damp swamps to the heart of our
desert lands, offers a home for some small insect.

The most striking habits and developments among insects is found in the
more highly advanced families of bees and ants where definite insect
societies are formed, resembling in many respects human societies and
human activities. Among these villages are established, homes built,
battles fought, slaves made, herds kept by shepherds, and even fields
cultivated. In these groups we have the nearest approach to human
intelligence.


_Their Role in Agriculture_

Some insects may be very destructive to crops, others are beneficial,
while the majority of insects are of no importance to man or
agriculture. The various forms of pests such as the chinch bug, potato
beetles, and others do an enormous amount of damage each year. They
destroy hundreds of millions of dollars worth of crops annually in the
United States alone. They devour enough to pay for the entire cost of
running the school system of our country and nearly enough to meet all
the expenses of our government. In view of these facts it is the duty of
each and every farmer, young or old, to acquaint himself with these
destructive pests and prepare himself for combating them. With a
knowledge of the methods of controlling these pests much of this
enormous loss can be prevented.

While some insects are extremely injurious, others are very helpful. The
products of the honey bee in the United States alone amount to several
million dollars a year, to say nothing of its value to the farmer in
pollinating fruits. The annual output of silk, all of which is spun by
the silkworm, is worth millions of dollars. Many other forms are of
value to man by producing material of commercial value such as lac,
shellack, dyes, medicines, etc. Of all the beneficial insects those
which are of greatest value to man are the parasites and similar forms
which help to keep in check many of the severest pests of the farm.
Insects are not all bad fellows by any means. One must acquaint himself
with those which are good and those which are bad before he can hope to
deal with them intelligently.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_And with childlike credulous affection
      We behold those tender wings expand,
    Emblems of our own great resurrection,
      Emblems of the bright and better land._"

                                        --LONGFELLOW.




CHAPTER II

COLLECTING INSECTS

    "_Does he who searches Nature's secrets scruple
    To stick a pin into an insect?_"

                                        --A. G. OEHLENSCHLAEGER.


In the life of every normal human there comes a time when he wishes to
make a collection of some kind. It may be a collection of coins, postage
stamps, post-cards, shells, relics, birds' eggs, pressed flowers or
insects. If the child grows up in the country, the result of this
craving is usually three or four cigar boxes of insects or an almanac or
geography stuffed with the most attractive wild flowers of the field. A
collection of this sort may be small and poorly kept and yet it is worth
while. In later life one will search in his mother's closet or attic
for the old cigar boxes which contain the remains of youthful efforts,
usually a mass of gaudy wings, fragments of insect legs and bodies and a
few rusty pins. This desire to make a collection is natural and should
be encouraged in the child. It tends to make him observe closely and
creates an interest in things about him, and if properly directed it
will add a store of information which can be gotten in no other way.


_Directions for Collecting_

Many boys and girls of the rural schools will have little time or
inclination to provide themselves with apparatus for collecting insects.
An old straw hat or a limb will serve their purpose. From their point of
view what difference does it make if they tear off most of the legs and
break the wings? They succeed in securing the "bug" and when pinned in
the box it will mean just about as much to them as the most perfect
specimen ever prepared.

[Illustration: A convenient home-made net for catching insects; note the
broom-stick handle, heavy twisted wire and mosquito net bag.]

This method of catching insects will prove effective where nothing
better is available, but any child can easily make a small insect net by
attaching a loop of fairly stiff wire to a broom handle or other stick
and sewing a bag of mosquito netting or other thin cloth to the wire. By
means of such a net one can catch insects more easily and at the same
time there is less danger of tearing such insects as butterflies. Care
must be taken in handling the stinging insects.

[Illustration: A cyanide jar for killing insects; note the lumps of the
deadly poison potassium cyanide in the bottom covered and sealed by a
layer of plaster of Paris.]

The country boy and girl will have little trouble getting hold of
insects, but they are often puzzled when it comes to killing them. It
seems cruel to pin up an insect alive and have it squirm for a day or
two and some means of killing them should be devised. Most of the soft
insects, such as flies, butterflies, etc., can be killed by pressing
their body, in the region of the wings, between one's thumb and
forefinger. Such forms as beetles and wasps can be quickly killed by
dropping them into coal oil or a strong soap suds. Any method which can
be devised for quickly killing the insect, and which will not seriously
mutilate it, can be used.

A convenient killing bottle can be made by sealing a few small lumps of
the deadly poison, potassium or sodium cyanide, in the bottom of a
strong, wide-mouthed bottle, with plaster of Paris; or a few drops of
chloroform or ether on a wad of cotton in a similar bottle, will also
serve as a convenient killing jar.


_Pinning and Preserving a Collection_

[Illustration: Method of pinning different kinds of insects.]

After the insects, have been caught and killed, they should then be
prepared for the permanent collection. Most insects such as wasps,
beetles, flies and grasshoppers should simply have a pin thrust through
their bodies until they are two-thirds the way up on the pin and then
put them away in a box. Such forms as butterflies and moths make a much
better collection if the wings are spread so as to bring out their gaudy
markings. In order to spread butterflies' wings, one needs a spreading
board, which can be made in ten minutes by taking a pine board two feet
long, and six inches wide and on this nail two strips an inch thick, so
that there is a crack between them. The crack should be half an inch
wide at one end and a quarter of an inch wide at the other end, and in
the bottom of it press strips of cornstalk pith so as to have something
soft in which to stick the pins. After a pin has been stuck through the
body of a dead butterfly between the wings, it is then pinned in the
crack so that the back of the butterfly is on a level with the strips.
Then the wings are drawn forward until they stand straight out from the
body when they are pinned down by means of strips of paper and left to
dry a few days until they become perfectly rigid. In this way a most
beautiful collection can be made very easily, but where time and
materials are not available, simply pin them up like other insects,
leaving the wings to hang as they will. After the specimens are pinned
they should be put away in cigar boxes in the bottom of which is pinned
or pasted a layer of cork or corrugated paper similar to that which
comes between glass fruit cans. These make ideal cases for keeping small
collections as the odor of tobacco helps keep pests from getting in to
destroy the collection.

[Illustration: Home-made spreading board for spreading butterflies and
moths.]

[Illustration: Cigar box with strip of corrugated paper in bottom used
as case for keeping pinned insects.]


_Rearing and Observing Them While Alive_

While studying an insect it is advisable wherever possible to first
study it where it is found in the field and later bring it home and keep
it alive in a jar where it can be fed and observed and its various
habits studied. Cages for breeding insects consist simply of a few glass
fruit cans and jelly glasses with tin or cloth covers. A child can
borrow one or two of these from his mother's fruit cellar. A layer of
moist sand or soil should be put in the bottom of the jar to provide a
retreat for those forms which go into the ground before changing to
adults. Before an insect is placed in one of these breeding cages its
food plant should be determined by observations in the field, and every
day or two a fresh supply should be gathered. Most of the forms
discussed in the following chapters can be kept in jars and reared to
the adult stage. Rearing insects is both interesting and instructive.
Every child should be given an opportunity to rear a few forms either
during the school year or during the summer vacation.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_I happened one night in my travels
      To stray into Butterfly Vale,
    Where my wondering eyes beheld butterflies
      WITH WINGS THAT WERE WIDE AS A SAIL.
    They lived in such houses of grandeur,
      Their days were successions of joys,
    And the very last fad these butterflies had
      WAS MAKING COLLECTIONS OF BOYS._

    "_There were boys of all sizes and ages
      PINNED UP ON THEIR WALLS. When I said
    'Twas a terrible sight to see boys in that plight,
      I was answered: 'OH, WELL THEY ARE DEAD.
    WE CATCH THEM ALIVE, BUT WE KILL THEM,
      WITH ETHER--A VERY NICE WAY:
    Just look at this fellow--his hair is so yellow,
      And his eyes such a beautiful gray._

    "_'Then there is a droll little darky,
      As black as the clay at our feet;
    He sets off that blond that is pinned just beyond
      In a way most artistic and neat.
    And now let me show you the latest,--
      A specimen really select,
    A boy with a head that is carroty-red
      And a face that is funnily specked._

    "_'We cannot decide where to place him;
      Those spots bar him out of each class;
    We think him a treasure to study at leisure
      And analyze under a glass.'
    I seemed to grow cold as I listened
      To the words that these butterflies spoke;
    With fear overcome, I was speechless and dumb,
      And then with a start,--I awoke!_"

                                        --ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.




CHAPTER III

THE GRASSHOPPER


The grasshopper or locust is one of the most ancient plagues of
cultivated crops. From the earliest time they have destroyed crops.
During Moses' sojourn in Egypt they were so destructive as to cause
severe famine and various other references to their destructive work are
to be found in the early writings. Since those early days, just think of
the crops that have disappeared between the greedy jaws of grasshoppers!

In our own country it has not been many years since the sun was darkened
for days by clouds of grasshoppers as they settled down from the Rocky
Mountains upon the growing crops in the neighboring states. One day a
field might have a promising crop and by the next day it might be left
as bare as a dry stubble field in August. Those days of great
destruction in America have largely passed but each year the active jaws
of "hoppers" devour a handsome fortune.

[Illustration: Common differential locust or grasshopper; a, egg nests
underground; b, young nymph; c, d, older nymphs; e, adult grasshopper;
f, nymph feeding on grass. This shows development with incomplete
metamorphosis.]

In the same order with the grasshoppers come the crickets, katydids,
rear-horses, devil's darning-needles or walking-sticks, and cockroaches.
The grasshoppers are most troublesome, however. They deposit eggs in the
ground and in other protected places. In the spring these hatch into
young "hoppers" scarcely larger than a pin head at first. Throughout the
early summer these small fellows feed and increase in size. They burst
their old skins and crawl out of them a number of times as they grow
larger. Toward fall they become full grown with four strong wings and
very powerful hind legs for jumping. In this condition most of the
common grasshoppers will be found in the fall when the rural schools
open.


FIELD STUDIES

The small so-called red-legged grasshopper is always most abundant in
the fall and for this reason we have selected it for our studies. It is
about an inch long, olive-brown in color with the ends of the hind legs
bright red. It is found everywhere in pastures, meadows and along
country roads. Approach one of them in the field and see what happens.
How does it get away? When disturbed, how far does it go? Does it hide
in the grass when you try to catch it? Observe one that has not been
disturbed. Where do you find it; on the ground or on plants? How does it
move about when not scared? Watch carefully and see what plants it feeds
on. How does it go about it? What do you find feeding on grasshoppers?
How does a turkey catch them? Have you ever seen a dull colored fly,
which inhabits dry paths and which flies with a humming sound like a
bee, feeding on grasshoppers? These are called "robber-flies" or
"spider-hawks" and they destroy thousands of grasshoppers.


BREEDING CAGE OBSERVATIONS

After you have learned all you can about the habits of the grasshopper
in the field, catch a few of them and take them home and put them in a
glass fruit jar. Collect green leaves for them and watch them feed.
Watch their method of feeding closely and see how it differs from that
of a horse or a cow. How do they move about in the jar? Which legs are
used in walking? What do they do with the jumping legs while walking? Do
they use their wings at all while in the jar? Watch them wash their face
and feet after feeding. Give them leaves of different plants, especially
of field and garden crops and determine which they like best. Can you
find any plant which they will not eat? Find out how fast they feed and
considering the life of any one individual to be 200 days, calculate the
number of grass blades each individual may eat. Are the feelers used
while in the jar, and if so for what purpose?


STUDY OF SPECIMEN

Take a grasshopper from the jar and examine it carefully. Count the
number of legs, wings and joints in the body. How many joints in the
legs? Examine the tip of the foot for a soft pad and on either side of
it a strong hook. What are these used for? What are the sharp spines on
the side of the hind-legs for? Examine the side of the body and see if
you can find the small breathing pores. How do the legs join the body?
Where are the wings attached? How broad are the wings as compared with
the body? How are they folded? Are the two pairs of wings alike? Which
is used most in flying? Is the head firmly attached to the body? Examine
the large eyes; where are they found? Will grasshoppers bite you while
handling them? What is the brown juice which escapes from the mouth when
disturbed? How long are the feelers as compared with the body? Can you
tell the males from the females? What is the distinction? Do they ever
make music? Examine for all the foregoing points and write a brief
report covering these. Make a careful drawing of a grasshopper from one
side; also make an enlarged drawing of the face of a grasshopper and
name the parts.




CHAPTER IV

THE HOUSE FLY OR TYPHOID FLY


In the house fly we find one of man's most deadly foes. War can not
compare with the campaigns of disease and death waged by this most
filthy of all insects. In our recent strife with Spain we lost a few
lives in battle, but we lost many more in hospitals due to contagious
diseases, in the transmission of which this pest played a most important
part.

The fly is dangerous on account of its filthy habits. It breeds in
filth, feeds on filth in open closets, slop-barrels, on the streets and
in back alleys and then comes into the house and wipes this germ-laden
filth on our food or on the hands or even in the mouths of helpless
babies. Who has not seen flies feeding on running sores on animals, or
on "spit" on sidewalks? These same flies the next minute may be feeding
on fruits or other food materials. We rebel when pests destroy our crops
or attack our stock, but here we have a pest which endangers our very
lives, and the lives of those dear to us.

If the fly confined itself to filth we could overlook it as it would
help to hasten the removal of filth. On the other hand, if it avoided
filth and remained in our home we could not overlook it, but we could
feel safe that it was not apt to do us a great deal of harm. But, like
the English sparrow, one minute it is here and the next somewhere else;
from filth to foods and then back again to filth. In this way it carries
disease germs upon its feet and other parts of its body and by coming in
contact with food material some of these germs are sure to be left on it
and cause trouble later. The fly's method of carrying disease is
different from that of the mosquito where the germ is carried inside its
body.

[Illustration: House fly; a, larva or maggot; b, pupa; c, adult; e, egg.
All enlarged. (Modified from Howard Bur. of Entomology. U. S. Dept.
Agri.)]

The presence of flies in the home is usually a sign of untidiness; but
it means more, it means that disease and often death is hovering over
the home. We are too apt to consider the fly simply as a nuisance when
we should take it more seriously. The child should be led to realize
that the fly should not be tolerated in the home, that it is dangerous
and that it can and must be destroyed.

The house fly may pass the winter either as the adult fly in cracks and
crannies about the home, or in out-buildings or it may remain as a
hard, brown, oval pupa in stables and manure piles when, with the first
warm days of spring, it escape from this case as the fly ready to lay
eggs for the first colony. The fly breeds largely in horse manure either
in stables, manure piles or in street gutters where manure is allowed to
collect. Each female lays a large number of eggs and since it requires
less than two weeks for the pest to mature, we are soon overrun with
flies in the summer where steps are not taken to control them. The
maggots are often so abundant in stables that they can be scooped out
with a shovel. This ceaseless breeding continues from spring until the
first frost in the fall.

[Illustration: Favorite breeding places of house fly. Such places should
be kept as clean and neat as the front yard.]

In the control of the fly and prevention of trouble from it there are
three important steps to take. First of all, go to the source of the
trouble and do away with or screen all breeding places. Then, by keeping
in mind the fact that the fly is comparatively harmless as long as it is
kept from filth laden with germs, do away with all open closets,
uncovered slop-barrels and other filth. As a further precaution keep it
from the home by the use of screens and when necessary "swatters." Do
not make the mistake of trying to control the pest with the "swatters"
alone. In the country too often manure is permitted to accumulate about
the barn during the summer with a view of using it on wheat ground in
the fall and this furnishes ideal conditions for the fly to breed.
Another source of constant danger especially in the rural districts is
the presence of open closets or worse still the presence of no closet at
all. This is without doubt the most dangerous accessory of the farm.
More screens should be used in the home and greater care in keeping them
closed.

[Illustration: An open closet to which the house fly has free access.
Such a closet is the most dangerous accessory of any home.]


STUDY OF THE FLY AND ITS WORK

Observe first of all the feeding habits of the fly. What foods in the
home is it most fond of? Make a list of all the food materials it is
found to feed on. Where and on what is it found feeding out doors? Do
you find it feeding on filth and if so, on what? Do you find it about
the barn? Where is it usually found in the barn? How can the fly carry
filth to food materials?

In studying the breeding of the fly determine where it lays its eggs and
where the maggots are found. Examine fresh manure in the stable and see
if you can find small white maggots about half an inch long and as large
around as the lead in a pencil. If you do, place some of them with some
fresh manure in a glass jar and see what becomes of them. In a few days
the maggots will disappear and in their places small oval, brown
bean-like objects will appear. A few days later these will crack open at
one end and the fly will crawl out. Keep records of the length of time
it requires for the pest to pass from one stage to the other. If maggots
cannot be gotten put some fresh manure in the jar and catch a number of
live house flies and put them in with the manure and watch for results.
Collect a jar of fresh manure with maggots and sift over it a little
powdered borax and see what happens to the maggots. Where horse manure
can not be properly disposed of, cheap borax is used to throw over piles
of manure to destroy the maggots and prevent the flies from breeding in
it. Write a brief description of the different stages and make careful
drawings of these. Do not mistake the house fly for other flies often
found on food in the home.

Collect a few flies and put them in a bottle and drop in with them just
a few crumbs of sugar and watch them feed. They cannot chew but a little
saliva from the mouth dissolves a little of the sugar which is then
lapped up as syrup. Notice what a peculiar sucker they have for drawing
up liquids. How can they crawl along in the bottle with their backs
toward the floor? Examine the tip of their feet for a small glue pad
which sticks to the glass. These glue pads and the sucker are well
fitted for carrying filth. Examine the fly carefully and write a brief
description of it. What color is it? How many legs? How many wings? Are
these transparent? Behind the wings there is a pair of small stubs which
is all that is left of the hind pair of wings. Are the eyes large? Can
you find a pair of small feelers? Why can you not pick up a fly like you
would a grasshopper? Is their eye sight good? Why are they always most
abundant on a kitchen screen door? Can they smell?

What are the fly's worst enemies? Will the toad eat them? Do chickens
eat them? Have you ever seen chickens scratching in manure and feeding
on the fly maggots? Put a few drops of formaldehyde, which you can get
from a druggist, in a few spoonfuls of sweet milk or sugar syrup and let
the flies eat it and see what happens to them. This is one of our best
poison baits for flies which get in the home or collect about the dairy.
Formaldehyde is a poison and when used in bait it must be kept out of
reach of children. Just about frost, in the fall, watch for the
appearance of inactive flies on walls, windows and other parts of the
house. These have been attacked by a parasitic disease. These are often
found sticking to walls and other objects about the room in the winter,
and are commonly thought to be passing the winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_The insect we now call the 'house fly' should in the future be
    termed the 'typhoid fly,' in order to call direct attention to the
    danger of allowing it to continue to breed unchecked._"

                                        --L. O. HOWARD.




CHAPTER V

THE MOSQUITO


Here we have another small insect which, like the house fly, is
extremely dangerous, due to its ability to carry the germs of disease.
There are hundreds of species of mosquitoes, some small, some large. The
majority of these are unable to carry disease so far as we know at
present, but they should be avoided as dangerous. The Missouri forms
which carry disease are the so-called malarial fever mosquitoes, and
they are entirely responsible for the transmission of this sapping and
often fatal disease. In the warm countries these are more abundant and
the fever is more fatal. In the south there is still another
disease-carrying mosquito, the yellow fever mosquito. This form is most
dangerous of all.

The mosquito first bites a patient suffering with malaria and in this
way it takes in germs along with the blood which it sucks from the
patient. After these germs pass through stages of development in the
body of the mosquito they are ready to be injected back into a healthy
person where, in due time, they cause the disease. The germs feed inside
the red blood corpuscles and at regular intervals they destroy a large
number of these causing a chill which is followed by fever and a new
supply of corpuscles is produced. This alternation of chill and fever
may continue all summer, if medicine is not taken to destroy the germs.
Quinine will kill the germs if it is taken so that plenty of it is in
the blood when the germs come out of the torn down corpuscles during a
chill.